So, it's now time to talk about for loops.
So, one of the reasons that
computers are so useful,
is that they can actually repeat an
operations multiple times, very quickly.
And this of course, removes the need for
a human to perform a repetitive task.
Now we've seen the For loop in earlier
examples, but now it's time to look at
them in more detail and
actually explain what was happening.
So, what a For loop does it actually
takes a range of values and
assigns them one by one to a variable.
It then executes a block of code once for
each value.
For a simple example, we're gonna have
a go printing at the values from 1 to 20.
So the format is type in the for,
keyword for, i in range.
1 comma 20 in brackets,
then we indent the code.
This is the block that we want to
have executed once for each value.
So print i is now, replacement field,
this should be double quotes at the start. dot
format i, that's the simplest example.
Again, what we're trying to do is go
to get the values from 1 to 20.
And then when we run that,
you can see what happens is for
each value of i, we've actually got the
value i is now one, two, three, four five,
right through to 19, so
it didn't go through the 20.
If you think back to this, remember
how our string slices that we used
return the characters up to, but
not including, the N number?
Well, ranges work in the same way.
The last value specified is not included.
So effectively, the way to rate is for
i in range (1-20).
Would be to actually say to yourself,
I'm going to actually loop
through the values 1 to 19.
So the computer will actually repeat
this code in here in the block,
in this case 19 times, and
incrementing the value of i each time.
So the first time it runs,
you can see i was set to 1,
i is set to 2, i is set to 3, and so
on and so forth, right through into 19.
Now we're gonna talk more about
naming variables in a later video.
Up until now we've just used simple
words that describe the value
that we've been dealing with.
And normally, you should avoid
using single character names for
variables like we've got here, like I.
Because I don't really give any
indication of what the variable is for,
but there is an exception to that and
loop control variables are one of those
few places where I and J are acceptable.
I is taken to be short for index and
the convention is that it's
acceptable name in a For loop.
So when you are creating a For loop
like this, using I is quite okay and
you find that there is a lot of code
out there that actually does that.
So another example of this.
We can actually see the variable uses an
index in the next example which I'm about
to type out, where we print each
character in a string once at a time.
So I'm going to actually just
put that on the next line.
Being sure to go to the start of
the block and not to indent it.
So we're gonna type in number.
number= 9,223,372,036,854,775,807
And what we're gonna do is gonna put for
I in range 0 len, which stands for
length, number.
Colon again, and
print number, i in square brackets.
There's a couple of things here,
we've introduced a new function.
This function here is called len which
is an abbreviation for length and
it actually returns
the length of a string.
So, how many characters
actually exist in that string.
So, in this case it should actually
return 25 if I'm counting correctly.
But with that said, the way that we
actually access individual characters
in a string,
they actually start from zero in
this case to whatever the length
is minus one, so 24 in this case.
And because we established earlier
that when we put a range in,
we only go up into one less
than the final number,
we know that in the case
the len(number) is gonna be correct.
Cuz it's only gonna go through and
process up to one less than that
final number in the For loop.
So that's actually one of the reasons
why the range runs up to but
not including the final value.
So in many other programming languages,
the loop would have to be specified
as from zero to, and
you might have to do something like this.
Length, number, take one,
because you'd have to code it for
the fact you're starting from zero,
and not starting from one,
as you can see in the example up here.
But in this case, with Python,
you don't actually have to do that,
because of course we established
that when you use a range,
it actually finishes at one less
than the number you specify anyway.
Basically, it works more how you'd expect
and your free from having to consider
whether you need to put this minus one and
other such trivia which is really cool.
So if we actually run this now,
you can see what's happened here.
Each time we've gone through the loop.
It's actually printed out
one element of that string.
And by using the square bracket,
what that is saying is print
the character at position i.
So we started on the first time position
i, i had the value of of zero, so
position zero is nine.
Next time I'm gonna go through and
position one is the comma, and so
right through to the end and
we should have an 807 on the end there.
The last three digits there, so,
you can see this is working quite nicely.
And it didn't crash or
anything like that and
actually come up with the right number.
That's one example but
let's take this all to the next level.
And let's just imagine that your
processing data at someone elses exported
from a spread sheet program.
And let's just say that the spreadsheet
was set to display numbers with commas or
some other separators like in Europe for
example it could be a full stop or
a space.
Normally, before we could
process these numbers we
would have to strip out the separators,
but there's other ways to do this.
And one way could be to
check each character and
only print it out if it's one
of the digits from zero to nine.
So what we could do is
actually take this code again.
I'm just gonna copy that.
And paste it down here.
We leave the same for range in here,
but we add another test here.
And the test we're gonna add is
if number i, in square brackets,
in a string, one, two, three,
four, five, six, seven, eight, nine.
That's the case, and then we come back
onto the print line, and then we actually
indent that because we only want that
executed, if this actually returns true.
So, if you remember the in function, it
returns true if whatever we're testing on
the left hand side is actually in
whatever is in the right hand side.
So, in this case we're looking for
the element in this case nine.
And as you get that nine, yes,
it's going to actually print that out.
So, what this should do is actually go
through and print all the numbers and
it should actually skip the commas.
Cuz of course,
a comma is not actually in this string.
So, let's just run that and
see if it works.
And what we should probably
do is just to make sure,
we'll just comment that out for
now, and run that again.
And you can see that it's now
successfully 9223372036854775807.
So it successfully skipped anything
that wasn't a digit from 0 to 9.
Now one of the disadvantages with that
is you notice that when using the print,
automatically Python's actually
adding the end of line character.
So it's actually starting on a new line.
So we can actually stop that if we want
though, because it actually syntax.
So you may actually seen
this when you actually
typing a comma after number, so I'll go back
and enter a comma there.
And notice how this comes
up automatically and
IntelliJ is saying there's
some other options here.
And by default,
end=\n which is a new line character.
So that's what happens automatically and
that consequently each number,
each time it's hitting
a number in the loop.
When we're doing the print,
it's actually skipping to the next line.
So we'll be providing
of course to first parameter,
which is obviously the object
that we want printed.
But as you can see in the screen, we can
also specify separator and a value for end.
So we're gonna come back to separators, and
the last two options file and
flush will be covered when we talk
about file IO in a later video.
But the end parameter is the one
that's interesting here.
Cuz at the moment you can see that it
defaults again, to \n, which is new line.
But we can actually override that,
so for example, if we set that
to an empty string, then a new line's not
gonna be started after each character.
So what we could do is we could
type something like end = '',
and that's overwriting
the standard n = '\n'.
And what we should see when
we run it is the numbers
now appearing from left to right.
Because there's not a new line being
automatically added each time
the printout's made.
Now if we wanted to use a number that
we come up for performing calculations.
What we could do is we can concatenate
each character onto the new string and
then convert the final
string to an integer.
So, we have to initialize a string
variable to hold the digits first or
Python will give an error.
Because it obviously won't know if a plus
should attempt to perform an addition or
concatenation.
So the way we do that is we come back
up here and we'll type something like
cleanedNumber = '', so
that's what we're gonna start with.
We're gonna leave the loop
as it was before.
We're gonna leave the if there as well.
But instead of printing out at this point,
what we're in fact going to do is we're
gonna type cleanedNumber = cleanedNumber
+ number[i], I'm gonna rid of that print.
Now back to the left, so it's gonna go
through and each time it finds a number.
It's gonna add only that digit to the
cleaned number string that we've actually
defined on line nine.
So now what we want to do is
convert that to an integer.
So we type newNumber = int(cleanedNumber)
And I could type something like print,
because as far as Python's
concerned this is now a number. print(
"The number is".format(newNumber))
So if we run this.
We get the number is 92 blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah 807.
So as far as Python'ss concerned
that is now a proper number.
So that's how you'd actually go
about converting from a string and
then actually building up a number
that's actually in a string.
And then converting that
string back to an integer.
Thing here is that, you need to actually
be very careful with your indentation,
because we're nesting blocks within
blocks and the For loop contains an
if block, which contains the block
that performs the concatenation.
So, if line 15 is actually indented by 4 or 8
spaces, then the code's still gonna work,
but newNumber's gonna be assigned
a value each time through the loop.
So, in other words if I actually tab that,
like so,
actually run this and
we still go the same result.
But what's actually happened here
is each time in this loop new
Number's been assigned that value.
And it doesn't make, it's not
really, it's not a really problem here when
you've only got a few numbers to deal with.
If you can imagine that if we had
10,000 numbers to actually deal with.
You're actually repeating this assignment,
of
the value int(cleanedNumber) each time we
actually run, so it's a lot processing.
So, the end result could be
significant delays you're introducing,
even if the final answer,
as you saw, was still correct.
So, in this case, it's far better
to actually have that calculation
do occur only once, and that's after
you've been through the entire for loop.
and we built up the entire cleanedNumber string
performed only once
as opposed to actually performing
it each time through the loop.
Now, note this is a specific example.
Where our orignal number came
from a spreadsheet program.
We knew that it was a valid number.
Just, you know they happen to
contain some extraneous formatting.
So this code that we've actually written,
wouldn't be suitable for
validating numbers that had been
typed on the keyboard, for example.
And also it wouldn't be suitable if
the spreadsheet contains scientific data,
where the numbers could be in
an exponential or scientific format,
such as 1.353e+18.
So we're gonna be looking at catering
both of those or catering for
both those situations in future videos.
So I'm gonna end this video here.
In the next video, we're gonna continue
with our discussion on four loops.
So I'll see you in that next video.